the following is a conversation with
William McCaskill he's a philosopher
ethicists and one of the originators of
the effective altruism movement his
research focuses on the fundamentals of
effective altruism are the use of
evidence and reason to help others but
as much as possible with our time and
money with a particular concentration on
how to act
given moral uncertainty he's the author
of doing good
better effective altruism and a radical
new way to make a difference he is a
co-founder and the president of the
center of effective altruism CEA that
encourages people to commit to donate at
least 10 percent of their income to the
most effective charities he co-founded
80,000 dollars which is a nonprofit that
provides research and advice on how you
can best make a difference through your
career this conversation was recorded
before the outbreak of the corona virus
pandemic for everyone feeling the
medical psychological and financial
burden of this crisis I'm sending love
your way stay strong or in this together
we'll beat this thing
this is the artificial intelligence
podcast if you enjoy it
subscribe on YouTube review it with five
stars an apple podcast support on
patreon or simply connect with me on
Twitter Alex Friedman spelled Fri D ma n
as usual I'll do one or two minutes of
ads now and never in the ads in the
middle they can break the flow or the
conversation I hope that works for you
and doesn't hurt the listening
experience this show is presented by cap
the number one finance I up in the App
Store when you get it you just collects
podcast cash your app lets you send
money to friends buy Bitcoin and invest
in the stock market with as little as
one dollar since cash app allows you to
send and receive money digitally
peer-to-peer and security in all digital
transactions is very important let me
mention the PCI data security standard
that cash app is compliant with I'm a
big fan of standards for safety and
security PCI DSS is a good example of
that where a bunch of competitors got
together and agreed that there needs to
be a global standard around the security
of transactions now we just need to do
the same for autonomous vehicles and AI
systems in general so again if you get
cash app from the App Store or Google
Play and use the code Lex podcast you
get ten dollars in cash wrap will also
donate ten dollars to first an
organization that is helping to advance
robotics and STEM education for young
people around the world and now here's
my conversation with William McCaskill
what is utopia for humans and all life
on Earth look like for you that's a
great question
what I want to say is that we don't know
and the Utopia we want to get to is an
indirect one that I call the long
reflection so period of post-scarcity no
longer have the kind of urgent problems
we have today but instead can spend
perhaps it's tens of thousands of years
debating engaging ethical reflection in
order before we take any kind of drastic
lock in actions like spreading to the
Stars and then we can figure out what is
like what is of kind of moral value a
long reflection as a that's a really
beautiful term so if we look at Twitter
for just a second do you think human
beings are able to reflect in a
productive way I don't mean to make you
sound bad because there is a lot of
fights and politics and division in our
discourse maybe if you zoom out it
actually is civilized discourse it might
not feel like it but when you zoom out
but so I don't want to say that Twitter
is not civilized discourse I actually
believe it it's more civilized than
people give it credit for but do you
think the long reflection can actually
be stable where we as human beings with
our descendants of a brains would be
able to sort of rationally discuss
things together and arrive at ideas I
think overall we're pretty good at
discussing things rationally and you
know at least in the earlier stages of
our mind be other lives being open to
many different ideas and being able to
be convinced and change our views I
think that Twitter's designed almost to
bring out all the worst tendencies so if
the long reflection were conducted on
Twitter you know maybe would be better
just not even not even to bother but I
think the challenge really is getting to
a stage where we have a society that
is as conducive as possible to rational
reflection to deliberation I think we're
actually very lucky to be in a liberal
society where people are able to discuss
a lot of ideas and so on I think when we
look to the future that's not at all
guaranteed that society would be like
that rather than less I rather than a
society where there's a fixed Canon of
values that are being imposed on all
society and where you aren't able to
question that that would be very bad for
my perspective because it means we
wouldn't be able to figure out what the
truth is I can already sense we're gonna
go down yeah a million tangents but what
do you think is the if Twitter is not
optimal what kind of mechanism this
modern age of technology can we design
where the exchange of ideas could be
both civilized and productive and yet
not to be not be too constrained where
there's rules of what you can say and
can't say which is as you say is not
desirable but yet not have some limits
as what can be said or not and so on do
you have any ideas thoughts on a
possible future of course nobody knows
how to do it but do you have thoughts of
what a better Twitter might look like I
think that text-based media are
intrinsically going to be very hard to
be conducive to professional discussion
because if you think about it from a non
informational perspective if I just send
you a text of less than what is it now
two hundred and forty characters doing
than 80 characters I think that's a tiny
amount of information compared to say
you and I talking now
where you have access to the words I say
which is the same as in text but also my
tone also my body language and we're
very poorly designed to be able to
assess you know I have to read all this
context into anything you say so
you know I say you may be your partner
sends you a text and as a full-stop at
the end are they mad at you right you
don't know you have to infer everything
about this person's mental state from
whether they put a full staff at the end
of a text or know where the flip side of
that
is it truly text that's the problem here
because there's a there's a viral aspect
to the text where it's you could just
post text non-stop it's very immediate
you know in the times before Twitter
before the internet you know the way you
would exchange texts is you write books
yeah
and that while it doesn't get body
language it doesn't get tone it doesn't
so on but it does actually boil down
after some time thinking some editing so
on boil down ideas so so yeah it's is
the immediacy and the viral nature the
out that which produces the outrage mobs
and so on the potential problem I think
that is a big issue I think there's
going to be the strong selection effect
where something provokes outrage well
that's high arousal you're more likely
to to retweet that where there's kind of
so bill analysis is not as sexy not as
viral I do agree that long-form content
is much better to productive discussion
in terms of the media that very popular
at the moment I think the podcasting is
great where like your podcast for two
hours long so they're much more than
depth than Twitter are and you are able
to convey so much more nuance so much
more caveat because it's an actual
conversation it's more like the sort of
communication that we've evolved to do
rather than kind of these very small
little snippets of ideas that when also
combined with bad incentives just
clearly aren't designed for helping us
get to the truth it's kind of
interesting there it's not just the
length of the podcast medium but it's
the fact that was started by people that
don't give a damn about quote unquote
the man yet of that it's there's a
relaxed sort of the style like that Joe
Rogan does there's a freedom took to to
express ideas in a unconstrained way
that's very real it's kind of funny in
that it feels so refreshing Lee
real to us today and I wonder what the
future looks like it's a little bit sad
now that quite a lot of sort of more
popular people are getting into
podcasting mm-hmm and then like me you
know and like and they they tried to
sort of create they try to control it
they try to constrain it in different
kinds of ways people I love like Conan
O'Brien and so on different comedians
and I'd love to see where the the real
aspects of this podcast and medium
persists maybe in TV maybe in YouTube
maybe Netflix is pushing those kind of
ideas and it's kind of it's a really
exciting word that kind of sharing of
knowledge yeah I mean I think it's a
double-edged sword as it becomes more
popular and more profitable where on the
one hand you'll get a lot more
creativity people doing more interesting
things with the medium but also perhaps
you get this place to the bottom where
suddenly maybe pod will be hard to find
good content on podcasts because it'll
be so overwhelmed by you know the latest
bit of viral outrage so speaking of that
jumping on effective attrition for a
second so so much of that internet
content is funded by advertisements just
in your in the context of effective
altruism we're talking about Inc the the
the richest companies in the world
they're funded by advertisements
essentially Google that's their primary
source William do you see that as do you
have any criticism of that source of
income do you see that source of money
as a potentially powerful source of
money that could be used well certainly
can be used for good but is there
something bad about that source of money
I think the significant worries with it
where it means that the incentives of
the company might be quite misaligned
with you know making people's lives
better
where again perhaps the incentives are
towards increasing drama and debate on
your social news social media feed in
order the more
people are going to be engaged perhaps
kind of compulsively involved with the
platform whereas there are other
business models like having an opt-in
subscription service where perhaps they
have other issues but there's much more
of a incentive to provide a product that
its users are just like really wanting
because you know now I'm paying for this
product I'm paying for this thing I want
to buy rather than I'm trying to use
this thing and it's gonna get a profit
mechanism that is somewhat orthogonal to
me actually just wanting to use the use
the product and so I mean in some cases
it will work better than others I can
imagine a I can in theory you imagine
Facebook movie having a subscription
service but I think it's you know
unlikely to happen anytime soon
well it's interesting and it's weird now
that you bring it up that it's unlikely
this example I pay I think 10 bucks a
month for YouTube's bread mm-hmm and
that's another thing I get it much for
that except just so no ads yeah but in
general it's just a slightly better
experience and I would gladly
now I'm not wealthy in fact I'm
operating very close to zero dollars but
I would pay 10 bucks a month to Facebook
content mok's a month to Twitter yeah
for some kind of more control yeah in
terms of advertisements and so on but
the other aspect of that is data
yeah personal data people are really
sensitive about this and I'm I as one
who hopes to one day create a company
that may may use people's data to do
good for the world wonder about this for
one the psychology of why people are so
paranoid well I understand why but they
seem to be more paranoid than it's
justified at times and the other is how
do they do it right so it seems that
Facebook is it seems that Facebook is
doing it wrong
that's certainly the part of the popular
narrative it's unclear to me actually
how wrong
like I tend to give him more benefit of
the doubt because there you know it's a
really hard thing to do right mmm and
people don't listen realize it but how
do we respect in your view people's
privacy yeah I mean in the case of how
worried are people about using the data
I mean there's a lot of public debate
and criticism about it when we look at
people's revealed preferences yeah you
know people's continuing massive use of
these sorts of services it's not clear
to me how much people really do care
perhaps they care a bit but they're
happy to in effect kind of sell their
data in order to be able to get you a
certain service that's a great term
reveal preferences so these aren't
preferences your self-report in a survey
this is like your actions speak yeah
exactly so you might say oh yeah I hate
the idea of Facebook having my data but
then when it comes to it you actually
are willing to give that data in
exchange for being able to use the
service and if that's the case then I
think unless we have some explanation
about why why there's some negative
externality from that or why there's
some coordination failure
or if there's something that consumers
are just really misled about where they
don't realize why giving away data like
this is a really bad thing to do then
ultimately I kind of want to you know
respect people's preferences they can
give away their data if they want I
think there's a big difference between
companies use of data and governments
having data where you know looking at
the particular code of history at
governments knowing a lot about their
people can be very bad if the government
chooses to do bad things with it and
that's more wedding I think so let's
jump into it a little bit most people
know but actually I two years ago I had
no idea what effective altruism was
until I saw there's a cool-looking event
in an MIT group here mm-hmm
they I think the it's called the
effective altruism Club or a group
that's like what the heck is that
yeah and one of my friends said I mean
they he said that they're just eccentric
characters I was like hell yes I'm in so
I went to one of their events and looked
up what's it about it's quite a
fascinating philosophical and just a
movement of ideas so can you tell me
what is effective altruism great so the
core of effective altruism is about to
answer this question which is how can I
do as much good as possible with my
scarce resources my time and with my
money and then once we have our best
guess answers to that trying to take
those ideas and put that into practice
and do those things that we believe will
do the most good and we're now a
community of people many thousands of us
around the world who really are Tanna
answer that question as best we can and
then use our time and money to make the
world better so what's the difference
between sort of classical general idea
of altruism and effective altruism so
normally when people will try to do good
they often
often just aren't so reflective about
those attempts so someone might approach
you in the street asking you to give to
charity and you'll you know if you're
feeling out a stick you'll give to the
person on the street or if you think oh
I want to do some good in my life you
might volunteer at a local place or
perhaps you'll decide you know pursue a
career where you're working in a field
that's kind of more obviously beneficial
like being a doctor or a nurse or health
care professional but it's very rare
that people apply the same level of
rigor and analytical thinking to lots of
other areas we think about so take the
case of someone approaching you in the
street imagine if that person instead
was saying hey I've got this amazing
company do you want to invest in it it
would be insane and no one would ever
think oh of course I'm just a company
like you'd think it was a scam
but somehow we don't have that same
level of rigor when it comes to doing
good even though the stakes are more
important when it comes to trying to
help others then kind of make money for
ourselves well first of all so there is
a psychology at the individual level of
doing good just feels good yes and so in
some sense and that's pure psychological
part it doesn't matter in fact you don't
want to know if it does good or not
because most of the time it won't yeah
so like in a certain sense it's
understandable why altruism without the
effective part is so appealing to a
certain population by the way let's zoom
off for a second do you think most
people to questions do you think most
people are good and question number two
is do you think most people want to do
good so are most people good I think
it's just super dependent on the
circumstances that someone is in I think
that the actions people take and their
moral worth is just much more dependent
on circumstance than it is on someone's
intrinsic character so there's an evil
within
it seems like like with the better
angels of our nature
there's a tendency of us as a society to
tend towards good less war I mean with
all these metrics hmm what is that us
becoming who we want to be or is that
some kind of societal force what's the
nature versus nurture thing here yes so
in that case I just think yeah so
violence has massively declined over
time I think that's a slow process of
cultural evolution institutional
evolution such that now the incentives
for you and I to be violent a very very
small indeed in contrast when we were
hunter-gatherers the incentives were
quite large if there was someone who was
you know potentially disturbing the
social order and hunter-gatherer setting
there was a very strong incentive to
kill that person and people did and it
was just the guarded you know 10% of
deaths among hunter-gatherers all
arguably were murders after a hunter
gatherers when you have actual societies
is when bars can probably go up because
there's more incentive to do mass
violence right to take over all their
conquer other people's lands and murder
everybody in place and so on yeah I mean
I think total death leaf the mother heap
from human causes does go down but
you're right that if you're in a
hunter-gatherer situation you're you
kind of group that you're part of is
very small then you know you can't have
massive wars that just massive
communities does exist but anyway there
the second question eating most people
want to do good yeah and then I think
that is true for most people I think you
see that with the fact that you know
most people donate a large proportion of
people volunteer if you give people
opportunities to easily help other
people they will take it but at the same
time we're a product of our
circumstances and if it were more
socially rewarded to be doing more good
if it were more socially the water to do
good effectively about them not
effectively then we would see that
behavior a lot more why
why should we do good yeah my answer to
this is there's no kind of deeper level
of explanation so my answer to kind of
why should you good is well there is
someone whose life is on the line for
example whose life you can save via
donating just actually a few thousand
dollars to an effective nonprofit and
like the against malaria foundation that
is a sufficient reason to do good and
then if you ask well why or I do that
and like I just show you the same facts
again those it's that fact that is the
reason to do good there's nothing more
fundamental than that
I'd like to sort of make more concrete
the thing we're trying to make better so
you just mentioned malaria so there's a
huge amount of suffering in the world
are we trying to remove so is ultimately
the goal not ultimately but the first
step is to remove the worst of the
suffering so there's some kind of
threshold of suffering they want to make
sure it does not exist in the world or
do we really naturally want to take a
much further step and look at things
like income inequality so not just
getting everybody above a certain
threshold but making sure that there is
some that that is broadly speaking
there's less injustice in the world
unfairness in some definition of course
very difficult to define a fairness yeah
so the metric I use is how many people
do we affect and by how much do we
affect them and so that can you know
often that means eliminating suffering
but it doesn't have to could be helping
promote a flourishing life instead and
so if I was comparing you know reducing
income inequality or a limb you know
getting people from the very pits of
suffering to a higher level the app the
question I would ask is just a
quantitative one of just if I do this
first thing of a second thing how many
people am I going to benefit and by how
much am I going to benefit am I going to
move that one person from kind of 10% 0%
well-being to 10% well-being perhaps
that's just not as good as moving a
hundred people from 10% well-being to
50% well-being and the idea is the
diminishing returns is the idea of one
year the when you're in terrible poverty
then the one dollar that you give goes
much further than if you were in the
middle class in the United States for
example absolutely and this this fact is
really striking so if you take
even just quite a conservative estimate
of how we are able to turn money into
well-being The Economist put it as like
a log curve that's the or steeper but
that means that any proportional
increase in your income has the same
impact on your well-being and so someone
moving from thousand dollars a year to
two thousand dollars a year has the same
impact to someone moving from a hundred
thousand dollars a year to two hundred
thousand dollars a year and then when
you combine that with the fact that we
in middle class members of rich
countries are a hundred times richer
than financial terms in the global poor
that means we can do a hundred times to
benefit the poorest people in the world
as we can to benefit people of our
income level and that's this astonishing
fact yeah it's it's quite incredible
a lot of these facts and ideas are just
difficult to think about because there's
an overwhelming amount of suffering in
the world
and even acknowledging it is difficult
not exactly sure why that is I mean I
mean it's difficult because you have to
bring to mind you know it's an
unpleasant experience thinking about
other people suffering it's unpleasant
to be empathizing with it firstly and
then secondly thinking about it means
that maybe we'd have to change our
lifestyles and if you're very attached
to the income that you've got perhaps
you don't want to be confronting ideas
or arguments that might cause you to use
some of that money to help others so
it's quite understandable in the
psychological terms even if it's not the
right thing that we ought to be doing so
how can we do better how can we be more
effective how does data help yeah in
general how can how can we do better
it's definitely hard and we have spent
the last ten years engaged in kind of
some deeper search projects so today an
answer
can two questions one is of all the many
problems the world is facing what are
the problems we ought to be focused on
and then within those problems that we
judge to become the most pressing where
we use this idea of focusing on problems
that are the biggest in scale there are
the most fact able where we can do have
the kind of make the most progress on
that problem and there are the most
neglected within them what the things
that are have the kind of best evidence
or we have the best guest will do the
most good and so we have a bunch of
organizations so I give well for example
is focused on global health and
development and has a list of seven top
recommended charities so the idea in
general and sorry to interrupt is so
what doc was sort of poverty and Emma
will flare an existential risk this is
all fascinating topics but in general
the idea is there should be a group not
sorry there's a lot of groups that seek
to convert money into good and then you
also on top of that want to have a
accounting of how good they actually did
perform that conversion how well they
did in converting money to good
so ranking of these different groups
ranking this the charities so that does
that apply across basically all aspects
of effective altruism so there should be
a group of people and they should be
they should report on certain metrics on
how well they've done and you should
only give your money to groups that do a
good job that's the core idea I'd make
two comments one is just it's not just
about money
so we're also trying to encourage people
to work in areas where they'll have the
biggest impact absolutely and in some
areas you know they're really people
heavy but money poor other areas of the
money which and people poor and so
whether it's better to focus time or
money um depends on the cause area and
then the second is that you mentioned
metrics and while that's the ideal and
in some areas we
do we are able to get somewhat
quantitative information about how much
impact an area is having that's not
always true for some of the issues like
you mentioned existential risks well
we're not able to measure in any sort of
precise way like how much progress we're
making and so you have to instead fall
back on just a regular sgt and
evaluation even in the absence of data
so as let's first sort of linger on your
own story for a second how do you
yourself practice effective altruism in
your own life because I think that's
really interesting place to start so
I've tried to build effective altruism
into at least many components of my life
so on the donation side my plan is to
give away most of my income over the
course of my life I've got a set bar I
feel happy with and I just donate above
that bar so at the moment I donate about
twenty percent of my income then on the
career side I've also shifted kind of
what I do where I was initially planning
to work on very esoteric topics in the
philosophy of logic for us whose
language things that have intellectually
extremely interesting but the path by
which they really make a difference to
the world is let's just say it's very
unclear that at best and so I switched
and said to researching ethics to
actually just working on this question
of how we can do as much good as
possible and then I've also spent a very
large chunk of my life over the last ten
years creating a number of nonprofits
who again in different ways are tackling
this question of how we can do the most
good and helping them to grow over time
- yeah we'll mention a few of them of
the career selection 80,000 80,000 hours
80,000 hours and a really interesting
group so maybe also just a quick pause
on the origins of effective altruism
because you paint a picture who the key
figures are including yourself in the
effect of ultras
movement today yeah there are two main
strands that can I came together to form
the effect of altruism movement so one
was two philosophers myself and Toby
awed at Oxford and we had been very
influenced by the work of Peter Singer
and Australian moral philosopher who had
argued for many decades that because one
can do so much good at such little cost
to oneself we have an obligation to give
away most of our income to benefit those
and actually in poverty just in the same
way that we have an obligation to run in
and save a child from Adamic finish
planning in a shallow pond if it would
just tell you in your suit to the
coaster a few thousand dollars and we
set up given what we can in 2009 which
is encouraging people to give at least
10 percent of our income to the most
effective charities and the second main
strand was the formation of giveWell
which was originally based in New York
and started in about 2007 and that was
set up by Holden canossian le Hassenfeld
who were two hedge fund dudes who you
know making making good money and
thinking well where should I donate and
in the same way as if they wanted to buy
a product for themselves they would look
at Amazon reviews they were like well
what are the best charities fans they
just weren't really good answers to that
question
certainly not they were satisfied with
and so they formed giveWell in order to
try and work out what are those
charities where they can have the
biggest impact and then from there and
some other influences can a community
glue and spread can we explore the
philosophical and political space that
effective altruism occupies a little bit
so from the little and distant in my own
life time that I've read of Iran's work
Iran's philosophy of Objectivism
espouses and it's interesting to put her
philosophy in contrast yeah with
effective altruism so it espouses
selfishness as the best thing you can do
yeah and if you but it's not actually
against altruism its if it's just you
have that choice but you should be
selfish in it right or not maybe you can
disagree here but so it can be viewed as
the complete opposite of effective
altruism or it can be viewed as similar
because the word effective is really
interesting because if you want to do
good then you should be damn good at
doing good right that's the I think that
would fit within the the morality that's
defined by objectivism so do you see a
connection between these two
philosophies and other perhaps other in
this in this complicated space of
beliefs that effective altruism is
positioned as opposing or
lined with oh definitely say that
objectivism England's philosophy is a
philosophy that's you know quite
fundamentally opposed to effective
altruism in we can waive insofar as
England's philosophy is about
championing egoism and saying that are
never quite sure whether the philosophy
is meant to say that just you ought to
do whatever will best benefit yourself
as ethical egoism no matter what the
consequences are or second if there's
this alternative view which is well you
ought to attain benefit yourself because
that's actually the best way of
benefiting society certainly in you know
Atlas Shrugged she is presenting her
philosophy as a way that's you know
actually going to bring about a
flourishing society and if it's the
former then well effective altruism is
all about promoting the idea of altruism
so it's and saying in fact we ought
really be trying to help others as much
as possible so it's opposed there and
then on the second side I would just
dispute the empirical premise it would
seem given the major problems in the
world today it would seem like this
remarkable coincidence quite suspicious
one might say if benefiting myself was
actually the best way to bring about a
better world so in that point and I
think that connects also with career
selection that we'll talk about but
let's consider not objectives but
capitalism so and the idea that you
focusing on the thing that you damn
I are damn good at whatever that is yeah
maybe the best thing for the world sort
of part of it is also mindset right sort
of like I the thing I love is robots
yeah so maybe I should focus on building
robots and never even think about the
idea of effective altruism it which is
kind of the capitalist notion yeah is
there any value in that idea and just
finding anything you're good at and
maximizing your productivity in this
world and thereby sort of lifting the
ball boats and benefiting society
and as a result yeah I think there's two
things I'd want to say on that so one is
what your comparative advantages what
your strengths are when it comes to
career there's obviously super important
because you know there's lots of career
paths I would be terrible at if I was
thought being an artist was the best
thing one could do well I'd be doomed
just really it quite astonishingly bad
and so I do think at least within the
realm of things that could plausibly be
very high impact yes
choose the thing that you're gonna that
you think you're going to be able to
like really be passionate at and excel
at kind of over the long term then on
this question of like should one just do
that in an unrestricted way and not even
think about what the most important
problems are I do think that in a kind
of perfectly designed society that might
well be the case that would be a society
where we've collected all market
failures we've internalized all
externalities and then we've managed to
set up incentives such that people just
pursuing their own strengths is the best
way of doing good but we're very far
from that Society so if one did that
then you know it would be very unlikely
that you would focus on improving the
lives of non-human animals that you know
aren't participating in markets or
ensuring the long-run future goes well
we're future people certainly aren't
participating in markets our benefiting
the global poor who do participate but
have so much less can a power from a
starting perspective that their views on
accurately kind of represented in by
market forces to guarded so yeah the in
serves pure pure definition capitalism
and just seem may very well ignore the
people that are suffering the most the
wide swath of them so if you could allow
me this line of thinking here so I've
listened to a lot of your conversations
Yellin I find if I can compliment you is
there very interesting conversation is
your conversation on Rogan and Joe
Rogan's was really interesting
with sam harris and so on whatever
there's a lot of stuff that's really
good out there
and yet when I look at the internet and
look at YouTube which has certain mobs
certain swaths of right-leaning folks
yeah
whom I dearly love I love all people
all especially people with ideas they
seem to not like you very much so I
don't understand why exactly so what my
own sort of hypothesis is there is a
right left divide that absurdly so
caricatured in politics at least in the
United States and maybe you're somehow
pigeon-holed into one of those sides and
there did you know maybe that that's
what it is this may be your message is
somehow politicized yeah I mean well how
how do you make sense of that because
you're extremely interesting like you
got the the comments I see on Joe Rogan
there's a bunch of negative stuff and
yet if you listen to it the conversation
is fascinating I'm not speaking I'm not
some kind of lefty yeah extremist but
just this a fascinating conversation so
why are you getting some wine like
nollamara hate so I'm actually pretty
glad that effective altruism has managed
to stay on relatively unpolitical
because I think the core message just
use some of your time and money to do as
much good as possible to fight some of
the problems in the world can be you
know appealing across the political
spectrum and we do have a diversity of
political viewpoints among people who
have engaged and effective altruism we
do however do get some criticism from
the left and the light was to Chris both
Oh be interesting to hear yeah so
criticism from the left is that we're
not focused enough on dismantling the
capitalist system that they see as the
loot of most of the problems that we're
talking about and there I kind of
disagree on partly the premise
where I don't think relevant alternative
systems would say to the animals or to
the the global poor which the future
generations can a much better and then
also the tactics where I think for the
particular ways we can change society
that would massively benefit you know be
massively beneficial on those things
that don't go via dismantling like the
entire system which is perhaps a million
times harder to do then criticism on the
right there's definitely in like in
response to the Joe Rogan podcast they
definitely were a number of inland fans
who weren't keen on the idea of
promoting altruism there was a
remarkable set of ideas just the idea of
it affected unmanly I think was driving
a lot of criticism let me okay so I love
fighting I've been in street fights my
whole life
I'm uh I'm as alpha and everything I do
as he gets and the fact that and Joe
Rogan said that I thought scent of a
woman is a better movie than John wick
put me into this beta category among
people core like basically saying this
yeah unmanly or it's not tough it's not
it's not some yeah principled view of
strength that is represented by as
possible and so actually so how do you
think about this because to me altruism
especially effective altruism is I don't
I don't know what the female version of
that is but on the male side manliest
[ __ ] if I may say so so what how do you
think about that kind of criticism I
think people who would make that
criticism are just occupying a like
state of mind that I think is just so
different from my state of mind that I
kind of struggle to maybe even
understand it where if something's manly
or unmanly or feminine or unfeminine I'm
like I don't care like is it the right
thing to do or the wrong thing to do so
yeah I let me put in that in terms of
man a woman yeah I don't think that's
useful but I think there's
notion of acting out of fear yeah that
or as opposed to out of principle and
strength yeah so okay yeah here's
something that I do you know feel as an
intuition and that I think drives some
people who do find kind of a and land
attractive and and so on as a philosophy
which is a kind of taking power of
you're taking control of your own life
and having power over how you're
stealing your life and not kind of
cowering to others you know really
thinking things through I find like that
set of ideas just very compelling and
inspirational but I actually think of
effective altruism has really Xenu
that side of my personality it's like
scratch that itch where you and just not
taking the kind of priorities that
society is giving you is granted instead
you're choosing to act in accordance
with the priorities that you think are
most important in the world and often
that involves then doing quite on quite
unusual things from a societal
perspective like donating a large chunk
of your earnings or working on these
weird issues about AI and so on that
other people might not understand yeah I
think that's a really gutsy thing to do
that is taking control that's at least
at this stage I mean that that's that's
you taking ownership not of just
yourself but your presence in this world
that's full of suffering and saying as
opposed to being paralyzed by that
notion yeah it's taking control and
saying I could do something yeah I mean
that's really powerful but I mean sort
of the the one thing I personally hate
too about the left currently that I
think those folks to detect is the
social signaling mmm-hmm
do you see when you look at yourself
yeah sort of
late at night would you do everything
you're doing in terms of effective
altruism if your name because you're
quite popular but if your name was
totally unattached to it
if it was in secret yeah I mean I think
I would to be honest I think the kind of
popularity is like you know it's mixed
bag but there are serious costs and I
don't particularly I don't like love it
like it means you get all these people
calling you a [ __ ] on Joey Logan it's
like not the most fun thing like how do
you also get a lot of sort of brownie
points for doing good for the world yeah
you do but I think I think my ideal life
I would be like in some library solving
logic puzzles all day and I'd like
really be like learning maths and so on
so you're and how you know have a like
good buddy offends and so on so your
instinct for effective altruism is
something deep it's it's not it's not a
it's not one that you know it's
communicating socially it's more in your
heart you want to do good for the world
yeah I mean so we can look back to early
giving what we can so you know we're
setting this up me and giving me and
Toby and I really thought that doing
this would be a big hit to my academic
career because I was now spending you
know at that time more than half my time
setting up this nonprofit at the crucial
time when you should be like producing
their best academic work and so on
and it was also the case that at the
time it was kind of like the Toby Order
Club you know he was he was the most
popular this personal interest story
around him and his plans donate and
sorry to interrupt but Toby was donating
a large amount can you tell just briefly
what he was doing
yeah so he made this public commitment
to give everything here and above 20,000
pounds per year to the most effective
causes and even as a graduate student he
was still donating about 15-20 percent
of his income which so quite significant
given that graduate students are not
known for being super wealthy that's
right and when we launched giving what
we can the media just loved this as like
a a personal into their story so the
story about him and his pledge was the
most yeah it was actually the most
popular news story of the day and we
kind of ran the same story a year later
and it was the most popular and used to
a year later - and so it really was kind
of several years before then I was also
kind of giving more talks I'm starting
to do more writing and then especially
with you know whether it was book doing
good better that then they started to be
kind of attention and so on but deep
inside your own relationship with
effective altruism was I mean it had
nothing to do with the publicity that
did it did you see yourself how did the
publicity connect with it yeah I mean
that's kind of what I'm saying is I
think the publicity came like several
years after afterwards I mean at the
early stage when we set up giving what
we can it was really just every person
we get pledged 10% is you know something
like $100,000 over their lifetime that's
huge so it was just we had started with
23 members every single person was just
this like kind of huge accomplishment
and at the time I just really thought
you know maybe over time we'll have a
hundred members and they'll be like
amazing whereas now we have you know
over four thousand and one and a half
billion dollars pledged that's just
unimaginable to me at a time when I was
first kind of getting this you know gang
with stuff off the ground so can we talk
about poverty and the other the biggest
problems that you think in the near term
effective altruism can can attack in
each one so poverty obviously is a huge
one yeah how can we help okay yeah so
poverty absolutely this huge problem
seven hundred million people and
actually in poverty living in less than
$2 per day where that's what that means
is what $2 would buy in the US so think
about that it's like some rice maybe
some beans it's very you know really not
much and at the same time we can do an
enormous amount to improve the lives of
people in extreme poverty so the things
that we tend to focus on are
interventions in global health and
that's for a couple few reasons one is
that Global Health just has this amazing
fact they're called life
expectancy globally is up 50% relative
to 60 or 70 years ago we've ever
allocated smallpox that's which killed 2
million lives every year almost
eradicated polio second is that we just
have great data on what works when it
comes to global health so we just know
that bed nets protects children from
prevent them from dying from malaria and
then the third is just that's extremely
cost effective so it costs $5 to buy one
bed net protects two children for two
years against malaria if you spend about
$3,000 on bed nets then statistically
speaking you're going to save a child's
life and there are other interventions
too and so given people in such
suffering and we have this opportunity
to you know do such huge good for such
low cost well yeah why not so the
individuals of for me today
if I wanted to to look at poverty how
would I help and I wanted to say I think
donating 10% of your income is a very
interesting idea or some percentage or
some setting a bar instead of sticking
to it how do we then take the step
towards the effective part so you've
conveyed some notions but who do you
give the money to
yeah so give well this organization I
mentioned is well it makes charity
recommendations and some of its top
recommendations so against malaria
foundation is this organization that
buys and distributes these insecticides
they did bed nets and then it has a
total of seven like charities that it
recommends very highly
so that recommendation is it is almost
like a star of approval or is there some
metrics so what are what are the ways
that give well conveys that this is a
great charity organization yeah so give
well is looking at metrics and it's
trying to compare Travie T is ultimately
in the number of lives that you can save
or an equivalent benefit so one of the
charities that recommends is give
directly which
just transfers cash to the poorest
families where poor family will get a
cash transfer $1,000 and they kind of
regard that's the baseline intervention
because it's it's so simple and people
you know they know what to do with how
to benefit themselves that's quite
powerful by the way so before give war
before the effect of autism movement was
there I imagine as a huge amount of
corruption mm-hmm
funny enough in charity organizations or
misuse of money yeah so that now there
was nothing like give up before that no
I mean there was some so I mean the
charity corruption I mean obviously
there's some I don't think it's a huge
issue if I were to just focusing him
along things prior to give well there
were some organizations like Charity
Navigator which were more aimed at
worrying about corruption and so on so
they weren't saying these are the
charities where you're going to do the
most good instead it was like how good
are the charity's financials how good is
this held are they transparent and yeah
so that would be more useful for weeding
out some of those worst charities so
give well just taking a step further
sort of in this 21st century yeah of
data it's actually looking at the
effective part yeah so it's like you
know if you know the wire cutter if you
want to buy a pair of headphones they
will just look over headphones behind
these the best headphones you can buy
that's the idea with gift well okay so
do you think there's a a bar of what
suffering is and do you think one day we
can eradicate suffering in our world
yeah amongst humans let's talk humans
for now talk point humans but in general
yeah actually so there's a colleague of
mine kind of turn abolitionism for the
idea that we should just be kind of a
bowl of suffering and in the long run I
mean I don't expect anytime soon but I
think we can I think that would require
you know quite change quite drastic
changes to the way society is structured
and perhaps even the you know that he in
fact even changes to human nature but I
do think that suffering whenever it
occurs
that and we should want it to not cur so
there's a there's a line there's a gray
area between suffering now I'm Russian
so I romanticize some aspects of
suffering there's a gray line between
struggle gray area between struggle and
suffering so one do we want to eradicate
all struggle in the world there's a this
there's an idea
you know that the human condition
inherently has suffering in it and it's
a creative force it's this it's a
struggle of our lives and we somehow
grow from that how do you think about
how do you think about that I agree
that's true so you know often you know
clay artists can be also suffering from
you know major health conditions or the
player and still want to come from
abusive parents yeah most I'm great
artists they think come from abusive
parents yeah that seems to be he's
commonly the case but I want to
distinguish between suffering as being
instrumentally good you know it causes
people to produce good things and
whether it's intrinsically good and I
think in physically it's always bad and
so if we can produce these you know
great achievements via some other means
where you know if we look at the
scientific enterprise we've produced
incredible things often from people who
aren't suffering have you know the good
lives they're just they're driven
instead of you know being pushed by
sense or languish they're being driven
by intellectual curiosity if we can
instead produce a society where it's all
carrot and no stick
that's better from my perspective yeah
but unless disagree with the notion that
that's possible
but I would say most of the suffering in
the world is not productive so I would a
dream of effective altruism curing that
suffering yeah but then I would say that
there is some suffering that is
productive that we want to keep that
because but that's not even the focus of
because most of the suffering is just
absurd yet I mean used to be eliminated
so let's not even romanticize this usual
notion I have but nevertheless struggle
has some kind of an inherent value that
to me at least you're right there's some
elements of human nature that also have
to be modified in order to cure all
suffering yeah I mean there's an
interesting question of whether it's
possible so at the moment you know most
of the time we're kind of neutral and
then we burn ourselves and that's
negative and that's really good that we
get that negative signal because it
means we won't burn ourselves again
there's a question like could you design
agents humans such that you're not
hovering around the zero level you're
having it like bliss yeah and then you
touch the flame in your own oh you just
slightly worse bliss yeah but that's
really bad compared to the bliss you
were normally in so that so you can have
like a gradient of bliss instead of like
pain and pleasure well on that point I
think it's a really important point on
the experience of suffering the relative
nature of it maybe having grown up in
the Soviet Union were quite poor by any
measure in and when I when I was my
childhood but it we didn't feel like you
were poor because everybody around you
were poor as uh and then in America I
feel I for the first time begin to feel
poor yeah because of the road there's
different there's some cultural aspects
to it that really emphasize that it's
good to be rich and then there's just
the notion that there's a lot of income
inequality and therefore you experience
that inequality that's where it's often
called do you so what do you think about
the inequality of suffering that that we
have to think about do you that do you
think we have to think about that as
part of effective altruism yeah I think
we're just things vary in terms of
whether you get benefits or cost from
them just in relative terms or in
absolute terms so a lot of the time yeah
there's this hedonic treadmill where if
you get
you know there's money is useful because
it helps you buy things or good for you
because it helps you buy things but
there's also a status component too and
that status component is kind of
zero-sum if you were saying like in
Russia you know no one else felt poor
because everyone around you is poor
whereas now you've got this these other
people who are you know super rich and
maybe that makes you feel you know less
good about yourself there are some other
things however which are just in tins
eclis good or bad so commuting for
example is just people hate it it
doesn't really change knowing that other
people are commuting to doesn't make it
any any kind of less bad but to push
back on that for a second I mean yes but
also if some people were you know on
horseback your commute and the train
might feel a lot better yeah you know
the there is a relative nickname yeah
everybody's complaining about society
today forgetting it's forgetting how
much better it is the better angels of
our nature how the technology is
improved fundamentally improving most of
the world's lives yes and actually
there's some psychological research on
the well-being benefits of volunteering
where people who volunteer tend to just
feel happier about their lives and one
of the suggested explanations is it
because it extends your reference class
so no longer you comparing yourself to
the Joneses who have they're slightly in
that better car because realize that you
know people with much worse conditions
than you and so now you know your life
doesn't seem so bad that's actually an a
psychological level one of the
fundamental benefits of effective
altruism yeah is is I mean I guess it's
the altruism part of effective altruism
is exposing yourself to the suffering in
the world allows you to be more yea
happier and actually allows you in the
sort of meditative introspective way I
realize that you don't need most of
wealth you have to to be happy
absolutely I mean I think effect that
also has been this huge benefit for me
and I really don't think that if I had
more money that I was living on that
that would change my level of well-being
at all
well as engaging in something that I
think is meaningful that I think is
stealing humanity in a positive
direction that's extremely rewarding and
so yeah I mean despite my best attempts
at sacrifice
um I don't know I think I've actually
ended up happier as a result of engaging
in effective altruism than it I would
have done that's such an interesting
idea yeah so let's let's talk about
animal welfare sure easy question what
is consciousness okay especially as it
has to do with the capacity to suffer I
think there seems to be a connection
between how conscious something is the
amount of consciousness and its ability
to suffer and that all comes into play
of us us thinking how much suffering
there's in the world with regard to
animals so how do you think about animal
welfare and consciousness okay well
consciousness easy question okay yeah I
mean I think we don't have a good
understanding of consciousness my best
guess is it's gone and by consciousness
I'm meaning what it is feels like to be
you a subjective experience this seems
to be different from everything else we
know about in the world yeah I think
it's Clio is very poorly understood at
the moment I think it has something to
do with information processing so the
fact that the brain is a computer or
something like a computer so that would
mean that very advanced AI could be
conscious information processors in
general could be conscious with some
suitable complexity but that also some
suitable complexity it's a question
whether greater complexity creates some
kind of greater consciousness which
relates to animals yeah right is there
if it's an information processing system
and it's smaller and smaller is an ant
less conscious than a cow less conscious
than an am monkey yeah and again this
super hard question but I think my best
guess is yes like if you if I think more
consciousness it's not some magical
thing that appears out of nowhere
it's not you know Descartes thought it
was just comes in from this other realm
and then enters through the pineal gland
in your vein and that's you kind of soul
and it's conscious so it's got something
to do with what's going on in your brain
a chicken has one 300th of the size of
the brain that you have aunts I don't
know how small it is maybe it's a
million for size
my best guess which I may well be wrong
about cuz this is so hard is that in
some relevant sense the chicken is
experiencing consciousness to a lesser
degree than the human and the ant
significantly less again I don't think
it's as little as three hundredths as
much I think there's evolutionary
reasons for thinking that like the
ability to feel pain comes on the scene
if I was heavily early on and we have
lots of our brain that's dedicated stuff
that doesn't seem to have to do and
anything to do with consciousness
language processing and so on so it
seems like the easy so there's a lot of
complicated questions there that we
can't ask the animals about but it seems
that there's easy questions in terms of
suffering which is things like factory
farming that could be addressed yeah is
that is that the lowest hanging fruit if
I may use crude terms here of animal
welfare absolutely I think that's the
lowest hanging fruit so at the moment we
kill we raise and kill about 50 billion
animals every year so how many 50
billion in yeah so for every human on
the planet several times that number are
being killed and the vast majority of
them are raised in factory farms where
basically whatever your view on animals
I think you should agree even if you
think well maybe it's not bad to kill an
animal maybe if the animal was lays in
good conditions that's just not the
empirical reality the empirical reality
is that there kept an incredible cage
confinement there dabiq tore detailed
without anaesthetic you know chickens
often peck each other to death other
like otherwise because in such stress
it's really you know I think when a
chicken gets killed that's the best
thing that happened to the chicken in
the course of its life and it's also
completely
necessary this is in order to save you
know a few pence for a place of meat or
place of eggs and we have indeed found
it's also just inconsistent with
consumer preference as well people who
buy the products if they could they or
they when you do surveys are extremely
against suffering in factory farms it's
just they don't appreciate how bad it is
and you know just tend to go with the
easy options and so then the best the
most effective programs I know of at the
moment are nonprofits that go to
companies and work with companies to get
them to take a pledge to cut certain
sorts of animal products like eggs and
cage confinement out of their supply
chain and it's now the case that the top
50 food retailers and fast food
companies have all made these Kanna cage
for the pledges and when you do the
numbers you get the conclusion that
every dollar you're giving to these
nonprofits result in hundreds of
chickens being spared from cage cage
confinement and then they're working to
other other types of animals other
products too so is that the most
effective way to do in have a ripple
effect essentially it's supposed to
directly having regulation hmm from on
top that says you can't do this so I
would be more open to the regulation
approach but at least in the u.s.
there's quite intense regulate to the
capture from the agricultural industry
and so attempt that we've seen to try
and change regulation have it's been a
real uphill struggle there are some
examples of ballot initiatives where the
people have been able to vote in a
ballot to say we want to ban eggs from
caged conditions and that's been huge
that's been really good but beyond that
it's much more limited so I've been
really interested an idea of hunting in
general wild animals and seeing nature
as a form of Cruelty that I am ethically
more okay with okay just from our
perspective and then I
about wild animals suffering they I'm
just I'm just giving you the kind of
yeah notion of how I felt because animal
uh because animal factory farming is so
bad yeah then living in the woods seemed
good yeah and yet when you actually
start to think about it all I mean all
of the animals in the animal world the
living in like terrible poverty right
yeah yeah so you have all the medical
conditions all of that I mean they're
living horrible eyes it could be
improved that's a really interesting
notion that I think may not even be
useful to talk about because factory
farming is such a big thing to focus on
but it's nevertheless an interesting
notion to think of all the animals in
the wild is suffering in the same way
the humans in poverty are suffering yeah
I mean and often even worse so many
animals we produced by our selection so
you have a very large number of children
in the expectation that only small
number survive and so for those animals
almost all of them just live short lives
where they starve to death so yeah
there's huge amounts of suffering in
nature I don't think we should you know
pretend that it's this kind of wonderful
paradise for most animals yeah their
life is filled with hunger and fear and
disease I could agree with you entirely
that when it comes to focusing on animal
welfare we should focus on factory
farming but we also yeah should be aware
to the reality of what life for most
animals is like so let's talk about a
topic I've talked a lot about and you've
actually quite eloquently talked about
which is the third priority that
effective altruism considers is really
important is there's no existential
risks yeah when you think about the
existential risks that are facing our
civilization what's what's before us
what concerns you what should we be
thinking about from an especially from
an effective altruism perspective okay
so the reason I started getting
concerned about this was thinking about
future generations
where
the key idea is just well feature people
matter Marlee there are vast numbers of
future people if we don't cause of own
extinction there's no reason why
civilization might not last a million
years I mean we last as long as typical
mammalian species or a billion years is
when the earth is no longer habitable or
if we can take to the stars then perhaps
it's trillions of years beyond that so
the future could be very big indeed and
it seems like we're potentially very
early on in civilization then the second
idea is just well maybe there are things
that are going to really derail that
things that actually could prevent us
from having this long wonderful
civilization and instead could cause
although an acausal own extinction or
otherwise perhaps like lock ourselves
into a very bad state and what ways
could that happen well causing our own
extinction
development of nuclear weapons in the
20th century at least put on the table
that we now had weapons that were
powerful enough that you could vary
significantly despite society perhaps
and all that nuclear war would kill it
cause a nuclear winter perhaps that
would be enough for the human race to go
extinct when you think we haven't done
it sorry general why do you think we
haven't done it yet
this is surprising to you that having a
you know always for the past few decades
several thousand of active ready to
launch nuclear weapons warheads and yet
we have not launched them yeah ever
since the initial launch on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki I think it's a mix of luck
so I think it's definitely not
inevitable that we haven't used them so
John F Kennedy Jim Cuban Missile Crisis
put the estimate of nuclear exchange
between the US and USSR that's somewhere
between one and three and even so you
know we really did come close at the
same time I do think mutually assured
destruction is a reason why people don't
go to war it would be mad um you know
why nuclear powers
don't go to war do you think that holds
if you can link around there for a
second like my dad's a physicist amongst
other things and he believes that
nuclear weapons are actually just really
hard to build mm-hmm which is one of the
really big benefits of them currently so
that you don't have it's very hard if
you're crazy to build to acquire a
nuclear weapon
so the mutually assured destruction
really works when you talk it seems to
work better when it's nation states when
it's serious people even if they're a
little bit you know dictatorial and so
on do you think this mutual assured
destruction idea will Caray how far will
it carry us in terms of different kinds
of weapons oh yeah I think it's your
point that nuclear weapons are very hard
to build and relatively easy to control
because you can control fissile material
is a really important one and future
technology that's equally destructive
might not have those properties so for
example if in the future people are able
to design viruses perhaps using a DNA
printing kit that's on that you know one
can just buy in fact there were
companies in the process of creating
home DNA printing kits well then perhaps
that's just totally democratized perhaps
the power to reap huge destructive
potential is in the hands of most people
in the world or certainly most people
with effort and then yeah I no longer
trust mutually assured destruction
because some for some people the idea
that they would die is just not a
disincentive there was a Japanese cult
for example Shinrikyo in the 90s that
had they what they believed was the
Armageddon was coming if you died before
Armageddon you would get good karma you
wouldn't go to hell if you died during
Armageddon maybe you would go to hell
and they had a bio
weapons program chemical weapons broke
them when they were finally apprehended
they hadn't stocks of sarin gas that
were sufficient to kill four million
people engaged in multiple terrorist
acts if they had had the ability to
print a virus at home that would have
been very scary so it's not impossible
to imagine groups of people that hold
that kind of belief of a death as in
suicide as a is a good thing for passage
into the next world and so on and then
you connect them with some weapons then
ideology and weaponry is make recreate
serious problems for us we ask a quick
question on what do you think is the
line between killing most humans and
killing all humans how hard is it to
kill everybody
yeah I'm thought about this he I've
thought about it a bit I think is very
hard to kill everybody so in the case of
let's say and all that nuclear exchange
and let's say that leads to nuclear
winter we don't really know but we you
know might well happen
that would I think there's all in
billions of deaths would it kill
everybody it's quite it's quite hard to
see how that how it would kill everybody
a few reasons one is just there were so
many people yes you know seven and a
half billion people so this bad event
has to kill all you know all almost all
of them secondly live in such a
diversity of locations so in nuclear
exchange of a virus that has to kill
people who live in the coast of New
Zealand which is going to be
climatically much more stable than other
areas in the world or people who are on
submarines or who have access to bunkers
so this is very like there's just like
I'm sure there's like two guys and
Siberia just badass there's the just
human nature somehow yes perseverance
yeah and then the second thing is just
if there's some catastrophic event
people really don't want to die so
there's gonna be like you know huge
amounts of effort to ensure that it
doesn't affect everyone
if you thought about what it it takes to
rebuild a society or smaller smaller
numbers like how big of a setback oh
these kinds of things are yeah so then
that's something where there's real
uncertainty I think where at some point
you just lose genetic sufficient genetic
diversity such that you can't come back
there's a it's unclear how small that
population is but if you've only got say
a thousand people a few of the thousands
and maybe that small enough what about
human knowledge and then there's human
knowledge
I mean it's striking how short on
geological timescales or evolutionary
timescales the progress in or how
quickly the progress in human knowledge
has been like agriculture we only have
entered in 10,000 BC cities will only
have you know 3,000 BC whereas typical
mammal species is half a million years
to a million years do you think it's
inevitable in some sense the agriculture
everything that came the Industrial
Revolution cars planes the internet that
level of innovation you think is
inevitable I think given how quickly it
arose so in the case of agriculture I
think that was dependent on climate so
it was the kind of glacial period was
over the earth warmed up a bit that made
it much more likely that humans would
develop agriculture when it comes to the
Industrial Revolution it's just you know
again only took a few thousand years
from cities to Industrial Revolution if
we think ok we've gone back to this even
let's say agricultural era but there's
no reason why we wouldn't go extinct in
the coming tens of thousands of years or
hundreds of thousands of years it seems
just vet it would be very surprising if
we didn't rebound unless there's some
special reason that makes things
different yes so perhaps we just have a
much greater like disease burden now so
HIV exists it didn't exist before and
perhaps that's kind of latent in
being suppressed by modern medicine and
sanitation and so on but would be a much
bigger problem for some you know utterly
destroyed the society that was trying to
rebound all this just maybe there's
something we don't know about
so another existential risk comes from
the mysterious the beautiful artificial
intelligence yeah so what what's the
shape of your concerns about AI I think
that quite a lot of concerns about AI
and sometimes the different risks don't
get distinguished enough so the kind of
classic worry most is closely associated
with Nick Bostrom and eliezer yudkowsky
is that we at some point move from
having now a way our systems to
artificial general intelligence you get
this very fast feedback effect where a
GI is able to build health you know
artificial intelligence helps you to
build greater artificial intelligence we
have this one system that's suddenly
very powerful far more powerful than
others then perhaps far more powerful
than you know the rest of the world
combined and then secondly it has goals
that are misaligned with human goals and
so it pursues its own goals it realize
hey there's this competition namely from
humans it would better if we eliminated
them in just the same way as Homo
sapiens eradicated the Neanderthals in
fact it in fact killed off most large
animals on the planet let walk the
planet so that's kind of one set of
worries I think that's not my I think
these shouldn't be dismissed to science
fiction I think it's something we should
be taking very seriously but it's not
the thing you visualize when you're
concerned about them what the biggest
near-term yeah I think yes I think it's
like one possible scenario that would be
astronomically bad I think that other
scenarios that would also be extremely
bad compatibly bad lot more likely to
occur so one is just we are able to
they I so we're able to get it to do
what we want it to do um and perhaps
does not like this fast takeoff of AI
capabilities within a single system it's
just limited across many systems that do
some different things but you do get
very rapid economic and technological
progress as a result that concentrates
power into the hands of a very small
number of individuals perhaps a single
dictator and secondly that single
individual is a small group of
individuals or single country is then
able to like lock in their values
indefinitely via transmitting those
values to artificial systems that have
no reason to die like you know their
code is copyable perhaps you know Donald
Trump or jumping create their kind of AI
progeny in an image and once you have a
system that's content once you have a
society that's controlled by AI you no
longer have one of the main drivers of
change historically which is the fact
that human life spans you know only a
hundred years give or take that's really
interesting so as opposed to sort of
killing off all humans is locking in and
like creating a hell on earth basically
a set of sense that set of principles
under which the society operates that's
extremely undesirable so everybody is
suffering indefinitely oh it doesn't I
mean it also doesn't need to be hell on
earth it could just be the wrong values
so we talked at the very beginning about
how I want to see this kind of diversity
of different values and exploration so
that we can just work out what is kind
of morally like what is good what is bad
and then pursue the thing that's bad so
actually so the idea of wrong values is
actually probably so the beautiful thing
is there's no such thing as right and
wrong values because we don't know the
right answer we just kind of have a
sense of which value is more right which
is more wrong so any kind of lock-in
makes a value wrong because it prevents
exploration of this kind yeah
and just you know imagine if fascist Val
you know imagine if there was Hitler's
utopia or Stalin's utopia or Donald
thumps or using pings forever yeah you
know how how good or bad would that be
compared to the best possible future we
could create and my suggestion is it
really suck compared to the best
possible future when you're just one
individual there are some individuals
for home Donald Trump is perhaps the
best possible future and so that's the
whole point of us individuals exploring
the space together exactly yeah and
which trying to figure out which is the
path that will make America great again
yeah exactly so how can effective
altruism help I mean this is a really
interesting notion they actually
describing of artificial intelligence
being used as extremely powerful
technology in the hands of very few
potentially one person yeah to create
some very undesirable effect as opposed
to AI and again the source of the
undesirable dust there is the human you
know AI is just a really powerful tool
so whether it's that or where their AI
is a GI just runs away from us
completely how as individuals as as
people and the effective altruism
movement how can we think about
something like this understand poverty
and their welfare but this is a far-out
incredibly mysterious and difficult
problem okay well I think there's three
paths as an individual so if you're
thinking about you know career paths you
can pursue so one is going down the line
of technical AI safety so this is most
relevant to the kind of AI winning AI
taking over scenarios where this is just
technical work on current machine
learning systems often sometimes going
more theoretical to on how we can ensure
that an AI is able to learn human values
and able to act in the way that you want
it to act and that's a pretty mainstream
issue and approach in machine learning
today so you know we definitely need
more people doing that
second is on the policy side of things
which i think is even more important at
the moment which is how should
developments in AI be managed on a
political level how can you ensure that
the benefits of AI are very distributed
it's not being powered isn't being
concentrated in the hands of a small set
of individuals how do you ensure that on
arms races between different AI
companies that might result in them you
know cutting corners with respect to
safety and so there the input as
individuals who can have is this we're
not talking about money we're talking
about effort we're talking about career
choice here we're talking about career
choice yeah but then is the case that
supposing you know you're like I've
already decided my career I'm doing
something quite different you can
contribute with money to where at the
center of effective altruism we set up
the long term future fund so if you go
on to effective altruism dog you can
donate we're a group of individuals will
then work out what's the highest value
place they can donate to work on
accidental risk issues with a particular
focus on AI and what's bad number three
this would path number three this was
that donated donations were the third
option I was thinking of okay and then
yeah there are you can also donate
directly to organizations working on
this like center for human compatible AI
at Berkeley future of humanity Institute
at Oxford or other organizations to does
AI keep you up at night this kind of
concern yeah it's kind of a mix where I
think it's very likely things are gonna
go well I think we're gonna be able to
solve these problems
I think that's by far the most likely
outcome at least overnight far the most
likely so if you look at all the
trajectories running away from our
current moment in the next hundred years
hmm you see AI creating destructive
consequences as a small subset of those
possible futures well at least yeah it
kind of eternal the Selective
consequence
I think that being a small subset at the
same time it still freaks me out I mean
when we're talking about the entire
future of civilization then small
probabilities you know 1% probability
that's terrifying what do you think
about Elon Musk's strong worry that we
should be really concerned about
existential risk so they I yeah I mean I
think you know broadly speaking I think
he's right I think if we took if we
talked we would probably have very
different probabilities on how likely it
is that we're doomed but again when it
comes to talking about the entire future
of civilization it doesn't really matter
if it's 1% or if it's 50% we ought to be
taking every possible safeguard we can
to ensure that things go well loved and
poorly last question if you yourself
could radical one problem from the world
or would that problem be that's a great
question I don't know if I'm cheating in
saying this but I think the thing I
would most want to change is just the
fact that people don't actually care
about insuring the long-run future go as
well people don't really care about
future generations they don't think
about it it's not part of their aims
well in some sense you're not cheating
at all because in speaking the way you
do in writing the things you're writing
you're doing you're addressing exactly
this aspect exactly that that is your
input into the into the effective
altruism movement so for that well thank
you so much so now I'm gonna talk to you
that really enjoyed it thanks so much
for having me
thanks for listening to this
conversation with William McCaskill
thank you to our presenting sponsor cash
app please consider supporting the
podcast by downloading cash app and
using code Lex podcast if you enjoy this
podcast subscribe on youtube review it
with five stars sign up a podcast
supported on patreon or simply connect
with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman and
now let me leave you with some words
from William McCaskill one additional
unit of income can do a hundred times as
much to benefit the extreme poor as it
can to benefit you or I earning the
typical us wage of twenty eight thousand
dollars a year
it's not often that you have two options
one of which is a hundred times better
than the other imagine a happy hour
where you can either buy yourself a beer
for five dollars or by someone else a
beer for five cents if that were the
case would probably be pretty generous
next rounds on me
but that's effectively the situation
were in all the time it's like a ninety
nine percent off sale or buy one get
ninety-nine free it might be the most
amazing deal you'll see in your life
thank you for listening and hope to see
you next time
you